Bhagavad-gita — public-domain English rendering (study corpus; Arnold/public-domain tradition style)

CHAPTER 2 — Sankhya-Yoga (selected)
The Blessed Lord said: Thou grievest for those that should not be grieved for, yet speakest words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor thou, nor these lords of men; nor will there be a time hereafter when any of us shall cease to be.

As the embodied soul continually passes in this body from childhood to youth to old age, so also it passes into another body at death. The self-controlled is not bewildered by this.

Know that to be imperishable by which all this is pervaded. None can cause the destruction of that, the Imperishable.

These bodies of the eternal, indestructible, immeasurable embodied Self are said to have an end. Therefore fight, O Bharata.

He who thinks the Self slays, and he who thinks the Self is slain—both do not know. This neither slays nor is slain.

It is not born, nor does It ever die; nor, having once been, does It cease to be. Unborn, eternal, permanent and primeval, It is not slain when the body is slain.

As a man casts off worn-out garments and puts on new ones, so the embodied Self casts off worn-out bodies and enters others that are new.

Weapons do not cut It, fire does not burn It, waters do not wet It, wind does not dry It.

This Self cannot be cut, burned, wetted or dried. Eternal, all-pervading, stable, immovable, everlasting is It.

Thy right is to work only, but never to its fruits. Let not the fruit of action be thy motive, nor let thy attachment be to inaction.

Perform action, O Dhananjaya, being steadfast in Yoga, abandoning attachment and balanced in success and failure. Evenness of mind is called Yoga.

When thy intellect crosses beyond the mire of delusion, then thou shalt attain indifference to what has been heard and what is yet to be heard.

When thy mind, bewildered by the scriptures, shall stand immovable and steady in contemplation, then shalt thou attain Yoga.

CHAPTER 3 — Karma-Yoga (selected)
Man does not attain freedom from action by abstaining from action, nor does he rise to perfection by mere renunciation.

No one can remain even for a moment without performing action; everyone is made to act helplessly by the qualities born of nature.

Perform thou always the prescribed action; action is better than inaction. Even the maintenance of the body would not be possible without action.

The world is bound by actions other than those performed for the sake of sacrifice. Free from attachment, O son of Kunti, perform action for that purpose alone.

As the ignorant act with attachment to work, O Bharata, so should the wise act without attachment, desiring the welfare of the world.

CHAPTER 4 — Jnana-Karma-Sannyasa (selected)
Whenever there is a decline of dharma, O Bharata, and a rise of adharma, then I manifest Myself.
For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of dharma, I am born in every age.

Whatever a great man does, that other men also do; whatever standard he sets, the world follows.

As the blazing fire reduces fuel to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of knowledge reduce all actions to ashes.

CHAPTER 6 — Dhyana-Yoga (selected)
Yoga is not for him who eats too much, nor for him who abstains to excess, nor for him who sleeps too much, nor for him who is too awake.
Yoga becomes the destroyer of pain for him who is moderate in eating and recreation, moderate in effort, moderate in sleep and waking.

When the perfectly controlled mind rests in the Self alone, free from longing for all objects of desire, then is one said to be harmonized.

As a lamp in a windless place does not flicker—such is the simile for the yogi of controlled mind practicing Yoga of the Self.

CHAPTER 7 — Jnana-Vijnana (selected)
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect and egoism—these are the eightfold divisions of My nature.
This is the lower nature. Know My other and higher nature, the life-element, O mighty-armed, by which this world is upheld.

I am the origin of all; from Me all proceeds. Knowing this, the wise worship Me with loving consciousness.

CHAPTER 9 — Raja-Vidya (selected)
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings exist in Me, but I do not abide in them.
And yet beings do not dwell in Me; behold My divine Yoga! Sustaining beings and not dwelling in them is My Self, the cause of beings.

Whoever offers Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or water—that I accept, offered with devotion by the pure-minded.

CHAPTER 12 — Bhakti-Yoga (selected)
Those who fix their minds on Me, worshipping Me with perpetual devotion, endowed with supreme faith—them I consider most perfect in Yoga.
But those who worship the Imperishable, the Undefinable, the Unmanifest, the Omnipresent, the Unthinkable, the Unchanging, the Immovable, the Eternal—
restraining all the senses, even-minded everywhere, rejoicing in the welfare of all beings—they also come to Me.

CHAPTER 15 — Purushottama-Yoga (selected)
There is an eternal ashvattha tree with roots above and branches below; its leaves are the Vedic hymns. He who knows it knows the Vedas.
There are two Purushas in the world—the perishable and the imperishable. All beings are perishable, and the Kutastha is called imperishable.
But there is another, the highest Purusha, called the Supreme Self, the eternal Lord who, pervading the three worlds, sustains them.

CHAPTER 18 — Moksha-Sannyasa (selected)
Abandoning all dharmas, take refuge in Me alone. I shall liberate thee from all sins; grieve not.

Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and where there is Arjuna, the archer, there are prosperity, victory, happiness and firm policy—such is my conviction.
