Bhagavad-gita — sample public-domain verses (pipeline fixture)

Chapter 2, selected themes (paraphrased public-domain style for testing)

The Blessed Lord said: You grieve for those who should not be grieved for,
yet you speak words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor these kings;
nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age,
the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized is not bewildered by such a change.

Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent there is no endurance,
and of the existent there is no cessation. This seers have concluded by studying the nature of both.

That which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is able to destroy the imperishable soul.

For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever cease to be.
He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.

As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones,
likewise the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

Weapons cannot cut this soul, fire cannot burn it,
water cannot wet it, and wind cannot dry it.

This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned nor dried.
He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and eternally the same.

Considering this, you should not grieve for the body.

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of action.
Never consider yourself the cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.

Perform your duty equipoised, O Arjuna, abandoning all attachment to success or failure.
Such equanimity is called yoga.

A person is said to have attained yoga when, having renounced all material desires,
he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.

When a man gives up all varieties of desire for sense gratification,
which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind finds satisfaction in the self alone,
then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.

Tradition note for pipeline metadata tests: vaishnava / bhakti literature often
comments extensively on these themes — karma-yoga, jnana, and devotion.
This fixture text is synthetic public-domain style English for offline ETL/RAG tests only.
