Isha Upanishad (public-domain English rendering for pipeline tests)

1. All this—whatever moves in this moving world—is enveloped by the Lord.
Enjoy what has been allotted; do not covet anyone's wealth.

2. Performing works here, one should wish to live a hundred years.
Thus for you there is no other way; action does not cling to a person.

3. Demonic are those worlds, covered with blinding darkness.
To them go, after death, whoever are slayers of the Self.

4. Unmoving, the One is swifter than the mind.
The gods cannot overtake It, for It goes before.
Standing still, It outstrips others who run.
In It the all-pervading air supports the waters of life.

5. It moves and It moves not; It is far and It is near.
It is within all this, and It is outside all this.

6. Whoever sees all beings in the Self alone,
and the Self in all beings, does not shrink away from anything.

7. When to the knower all beings have become one with the Self,
what delusion, what sorrow is there for one who sees oneness?

8. He has filled all; He is radiant, bodiless, scatheless,
without sinews, pure, untouched by evil.
He is the seer, the thinker, the all-pervading, the self-existent.
He has duly allotted duties according to their nature through eternal years.

9. Into blinding darkness enter those who worship ignorance;
into greater darkness, as it were, those who delight in knowledge alone.

10. Distinct, they say, is the result of knowledge,
and distinct, they say, is the result of ignorance.
Thus have we heard from the wise who explained it to us.

11. Knowledge and ignorance—whoever knows these two together,
crossing death through ignorance, enjoys immortality through knowledge.

12. Into blinding darkness enter those who worship non-becoming;
into greater darkness, as it were, those who delight in becoming.

13. Distinct, they say, is from becoming;
distinct, they say, is from non-becoming.
Thus have we heard from the wise who explained it to us.

14. Becoming and destruction—whoever knows these two together,
crossing death through destruction, enjoys immortality through becoming.

15. The face of truth is covered with a golden disc.
That unveil, O Pushan, so that I who love the truth may see.

16. O Pushan, sole seer, Yama, Surya, son of Prajapati,
spread forth your rays, gather your brilliance—
that form of yours which is most beautiful, that I see.
He who is that Person, He am I.

17. May this life enter into the immortal breath;
then may this body end in ashes.
Om. O mind, remember what has been done. Remember. O mind, remember what has been done. Remember.

18. O Agni, lead us by a good path to prosperity,
you who know all deeds. Remove from us deceitful sin.
To you we offer our fullest words of praise.

Peace invocation
Om. That is full; this is full. From fullness, fullness comes forth.
Taking fullness from fullness, fullness alone remains.
Om peace, peace, peace.
